- 光标在定位在前
- 行号
	
    ```
    # command mode
    :set number 
    :set nu

    :set nonumber
    :set nu!

    # add to .vimrc in home directory to make it default
    ```

# `vi`
- POSIX, a standard for program compatibility on Unix systems, requires that `vi` be present
- `vi` derives its name from the word “visual”
    - Previous to visual editors, there were line editors that operated on a single line of text at a time. To specify a change, we tell a line editor to go to a particular line and describe what change to make, such as adding or deleting text. With the advent of video terminals (rather than printer-based terminals like teletypes), visual editing became possible
    - `vi` actually incorporates a powerful line editor called `ex`, and we can use line editing commands while using `vi`
- `vim` is a substantial improvement over traditional Unix `vi` and is usually symbolically linked (or aliased) to the name `vi` on Linux systems
    - In the discussions that follow, we will assume that we have a program called `vi` that is really `vim`
- `vi` is a *modal editor*. When `vi` starts, it begins in command mode. In this mode, almost every key is a command
    - > If you read the vim documentation, you will notice that (confusingly) command mode is called normal mode and `ex` commands are called command mode
- If you get “lost” in `vi`, try pressing the `esc` key twice to find your way again
- > Compatibility mode means that `vim` will run in a mode that is closer to the normal behavior of `vi` rather than the enhanced behavior of `vim`
    - Try running `vim` instead of `vi`. If that works, consider adding `alias vi='vim'` to your `.bashrc` file
    - Alternatively, use this command to add `echo "set nocp" >> ~/.vimrc` to your vim configuration file
- > Some distributions install a minimal version of `vim` by default that supports only a limited set of `vim` features
# Editing modes
- The leading tilde characters (`~`) indicate that no text exists on that line
## Enter insert mode
- Press `i`
- To exit insert mode and return to command mode, press the `esc` key
## Saving
- To save the change we just made to our file, we must enter an `ex` command while in command mode
	
    ```bash
    :w<Enter>
    ```

# Moving the cursor around
- When `vi` was originally written, not all video terminals had arrow keys, and skilled typists could use regular keyboard keys to move the cursor without ever having to lift their fingers from the keyboard
- Many commands in `vi` can be prefixed with a number. By prefixing a command with a number, we may specify the number of times a command is to be carried out
    - For example, the command `5j` causes `vi` to move the cursor down 5 lines

Key | Moves the cursor |
--|--|
`l` or right arrow | Right one character. |
`h` or left arrow | Left one character. |
`j` or down arrow | Down one line. |
`k` or up arrow | Up one line. |
`0` (zero) |To the beginning of the current line. |
`^` | To the first non-whitespace character on the current line. |
`$` | To the end of the current line. |
`w` | To the beginning of the next word or punctuation character. |
`W` | To the beginning of the next word, ignoring punctuation characters. |
`b` | To the beginning of the previous word or punctuation character. |
`B` | To the beginning of the previous word, ignoring punctuation characters. |
`ctrl-f` or page down | Down one page. |
`ctrl-b` or page up | Up one page. |
`numberG` | To line number. For example, `1G` moves to the first line of the file. |
`G` | To the last line of the file. |
| |

# Basic editing
## Appending text
- If we wanted to add some text to the end of this sentence, we would discover that the `i` command will not do it, because we can’t move the cursor beyond the end of the line
- `vi` provides `a` command to append text
    - If we move the cursor to the end of the line and type `a`, the cursor will move past the end of the line and `vi` will enter insert mode
- Because we will almost always want to append text to the end of a line, `vi` offers a shortcut `A` to move to the end of the current line and start appending
## Opening a line
- Inserts a blank line between two existing lines and enters insert mode

Key | Opens |
--|--|
`o` | The line below the current line |
`O` | The line above the current line |
| |

- Undo the change by typing `u`
    - Real `vi` supports only a single level of undo. `vim` supports multiple levels
## Deleting text
- The `x` command will delete a character at the cursor location
    - `x` may be preceded by a number specifying how many characters are to be deleted
- The `d` command is more general purpose
    - Like `x`, it may be preceded by a number specifying the number of times the deletion is to be performed
    - In addition, `d` is always followed by a movement command that controls the size of the deletion

Key | Deletes |
--|--|
`x` | The current character |
`3x` | The current character and the next two characters |
`dd` | The current line |
`5dd` | The current line and the next four lines |
`dW` | From the current cursor position to the beginning of  the next word |
`d$` | From the current cursor location to the end of the  current line |
`d0` | From the current cursor location to the beginning of  the line |
`d^` | From the current cursor location to the first non-whitespace character in the line |
`dG` | From the current line to the end of the file |
`d20G` | From the current line to the twentieth line of the file |
| |

## Cutting, copying, and pasting text
- The `d` command not only deletes text, it also “cuts” text
    - Each time we use the `d` command, the deletion is copied into a paste buffer (think clipboard) that we can later recall with the `p` command to paste the contents of the buffer either before or after the cursor
- `P` pastes above/before; `p` pastes under/after
- The `y` command is used to “yank” (copy) text in much the same way the `d` command is used to cut text

Key | Copies |
--|--|
`yy` | The current line
`5yy` | The current line and the next four lines
`yW` | From the current cursor position to the beginning of the next word
`y$` | From the current cursor location to the end of the current line
`y0` | From the current cursor location to the beginning of the line
`y^` | From the current cursor location to the first non-whitespace character in the line
`yG` | From the current line to the end of the file
`y20G` | From the current line to the twentieth line of the file
| |

## Joining lines
- `vi` is rather strict about its idea of a line. Normally, it is not possible to move the cursor to the end of a line and delete the end-of-line character to join one line with the one below it
- `vi` provides a specific command, `J` (not to be confused with `j`, which is for cursor movement), to join lines together
# Search and replace
## Search within a line
- The `f` command searches a line and moves the cursor to the next instance of a specified character
    - For example, the command `fa` would move the cursor to the next occurrence of the character a within the current line
    - After performing a character search within a line, the search may be repeated by typing a semicolon
## Search the entire file
- To move the cursor to the next occurrence of a word or phrase, the `/` command is used
    - This works the same way as we learned earlier in the `less` program
- When you type the `/` command, a `/` will appear at the bottom of the screen. Next, type the word or phrase to be searched for, followed by the enter key. The cursor will move to the next location containing the search string
- A search may be repeated using the previous search string with the `n` command
- `vi` allows the use of regular expressions
## Global search and replace
- `vi` uses an `ex` command to perform search-and-replace operations (called substitution in `vi`) over a range of lines or the entire file
	
    ```bash
    # change the word "Line" to "line" for the entire file
    :%s/Line/line/g
    ```

    Item | Meaning |
    --|--|
    `:` | The colon character starts an ex command.
    `%` | This specifies the range of lines for the operation. `%` is a shortcut meaning from the first line to the last line. Alternately, the range could have been specified `1,5` (since our file is five lines long) or `1,$`, which means “from line 1 to the last line in the file.” If the range of lines is omitted, the operation is performed only on the current line.
    `s` | This specifies the operation. In this case, it’s substitution (search-and-replace).
    `/Line/line/` | This specifies the search pattern and the replacement text.
    `g` | This means “global” in the sense that the search-and-replace is performed on every instance of the search string in the line. If omitted, only the first instance of the search string on each line is replaced.
    | |
- We can also specify a substitution command with user confirmation. This is done by adding a `c` to the end of the command
- Replace confirmation keys

    Keys | Action |
    --|--|
    `y` | Perform the substitution.
    `n` | Skip this instance of the pattern.
    `a` | Perform the substitution on this and all subsequent instances of the pattern.
    `q` or `esc` | Quit substituting.
    `l` | Perform this substitution and then quit. This is short for “last.”
    `ctrl-E`, `ctrl-Y` | Scroll down and scroll up, respectively. This is useful for viewing the context of the proposed substitution.
    | |

# Editing multiple files
- With vi we can open multiple files for editing by specifying them on the command line `vi file1 file2 file3 ...`
- `vi` will start, and we will see the first file on the screen
## Switching between files
- Use the `ex` command
	
    ```bash
    # to the next
    :bn
    # to the previous
    :bp
    ```

- `vi` enforces a policy that prevents us from switching files if the current file has unsaved changes
- To force `vi` to switch files and abandon your changes, add an exclamation point (`!`) to the command
- `vim` (and some versions of `vi`) provides some `ex` commands that make multiple files easier to manage
- View a list of files being edited with the `:buffers` command
- To switch to another buffer (file), type `:buffer ` followed by the number of the buffer you want to edit (`:buffer 2`)
## Opening additional files for editing
- The ex command `:e` (short for “edit”) followed by a filename will open an additional file
## Copying content from one file into another
- This is easily done using the usual yank and paste commands we used earlier
## Inserting an entire file into another
- The `:r` command (short for “read”) inserts the specified file below the cursor position (`:r foo.txt`)
# Saving work
- In command mode, typing `ZZ` will save the current file and exit `vi`
- Likewise, the `ex` command `:wq` will combine the `:w` and `:q` commands into one that will both save the file and exit
- The `:w` command may also specify an optional filename. This acts like Save As
	
    ```bash
    :w foo1.txt
    ```

    - While this command saves the file under a new name, it does not change the name of the file you are editing. As you continue to edit, you will still be editing `foo.txt`, not `foo1.txt`
- `less` is influenced by `vim`